Title: Climate Drift 3.0: One Year In
Author: Unknown Author
URL: https://www.climatedrift.com/p/climate-drift-30-one-year-in
==============================

Welcome to
Climate Drift
- the place where we dive into climate solutions and help you find your role in the race to net zero.
If you haven’t subscribed, join here:
Subscribe
Hey there! 👋
Skander & Marco here.
Climate Drift has come a long way since we published
our solutions map
.
In a year, Climate Drift has become a go-to resource for climate solutions and how to break into climate:
Thousands of leading Climate investors and founders
from organizations like Breakthrough Energy, Elemental Excelerator, and RMI are diving deep into our climate solutions analyses.
We've successfully run 2 cohorts of our Climate Drift Career Accelerator
, helping experienced professionals land leadership roles in climate companies.
Our alumni are now working on Rewiring America, electrifying homes and businesses, finding solutions to cow burps, developing heavy duty cargo bikes‘ for last mile deliveries, helping build out the nascent SAF industry and many more
We've hosted over 50 speakers from climate companies and investors who share their behind-the-scenes knowledge, networks, and intel with our Climate Drift members.
Time to take stock, review where we are and share where we are headed.
🌊Let's dive in
You are reading this because you like our deep dives.
While originally researched and written by yours truly, it's now increasingly powered by our community of Climate Drifties - experienced professionals who join us through the Climate Drift Career Accelerator program.
In the last month we dove into:
Recycled Aluminum: Miracle or Myth
with Matt
Distributed Energy Resources (DER)
with Maura
Checklist for First-of-a-Kind (FOAK) Funding
with Jarek
And many more.
There is a lot more coming, we are tackling topics from
How to get more young people into Farming
to
Incentivizing Geostorage
to
The climate impact of AI
.
All coming from Climate Drifties who just graduated from our accelerator.
🚀 Time for the first announcement:
Skander here. Marco didn’t want me to share this yet, but I couldn’t wait.
For all readers: Want a deep dive on a specific topic?
For Investors: Are you developing your thesis on the climate impact of AI or Battery Recycling?
Introducing: Deep Dives on Demand.
For early access: Drop us a line at
[email protected]
On to the regularly scheduled program.
The Climate Drift Career Accelerator:
Bringing the best talent into climate
So what is the accelerator?
Our 8-week Climate Drift Career Accelerator is
designed for mid-career professionals
ready to move into the climate economy.
Climate Drift members gain an overview of impactful climate solutions, identify areas they're passionate about, and
apply their skills to solve real problems that leading climate companies and investors share directly with us
- some of which we publish as deep dives on Climate Drift.
Veteran teachers call this:
👉 Hands-on Education + Real-world Learning
Were you constantly apply your skills to a challenge. Trying to figure out what works. How things could be done better. All on something real (not a theoretical group project).
Because of this strong focus on action, our members achieve real results in their focus climate niche: C-suite executives/leaders reach out to them for networking conversations, members are being recognized as thought leaders in areas like Enteric Methane, Biochar or Sustainable Mining, and gaining the right traction with hiring managers.
Join the Climate Drift Accelerator and accelerate your climate journey.
We are selecting people for our next cohort now, and we're looking for talented individuals like you to make a real difference.
🚀 Apply today: The next cohort starts in February.
Apply Now
🚀
Announcement #2: New Website!
We’ve built a new site that dives into everything you need to know about our accelerator program. Check it out
here
.
On Community
We design our community
and each cohort
for a single goal
:
👉
Everyone you meet inside Climate Drift is worth talking to
.
Our members are leaders from across tech, education, finance, and non-profits, giving you the chance to engage with senior executives who bring a wealth of experience and diverse perspectives to the table.
They have held leadership positions at tech giants (Apple, Spotify, Google, Amazon, etc.) and been early employees at household startups like Shopify, Solugen & Wealthfront.
They've managed teams ranging from a dozen to hundreds, overseen billion-dollar product lines, led mergers and acquisitions, and helped take companies public.
Some have already left their mark on climate: Building robots to harvest lettuce in the biggest vertical farms in North America, spending a decade at public utilities deploying $300M+ into fleet electrification or designing the ebike you love.
Whoever you meet in the Climate Drift Community, you will be as impressed as we are.
How do we make this happen?
We curate our community intentionally through a rigorous interview process.
Because the climate economy needs experienced professionals who can execute, scale companies to the next level, and bring new climate solutions to market.
How does the accelerator work?
As we shared
in our last update
:
The program addresses four main challenges of professionals wanting to break into climate:
1️⃣ Lack of network in the climate sector
2️⃣ Overwhelming number of climate solutions
3️⃣ Absence of direct climate experience
4️⃣ Limited job transition experience.
Our current program is designed for execution and action:
Which is why we front load the baseline learnings before the accelerator starts (in Week 0) by sharing initial prep material to read/listen/watch.
We also invite all participants to book a 1-1 mentor call with Skander to dive into areas they’d like to focus on, giving them specific resources to get started the right way.
And then it’s off to the races:
Each week we are covering a different topic:
And during the week we are diving deep, every day:
The Climate Drift accelerator would be nothing without our speakers.
Each week, we host two firesides: an investor and an operator
, who share their experiences and current challenges.
Here are a handful of the leading professionals who have joined our last two cohorts and
shared their inside knowledge, access to their network, and understanding of “what needs doing today”
:
(click on the image to see more info)
Join the Climate Drift Accelerator and accelerate your climate journey.
We are selecting people for our next cohort now, and we're looking for talented individuals like you to make a real difference.
🚀 Apply today: The next cohort starts in February.
Apply Now
But Does It Actually Work?
Our last cohort of 60+ senior professionals gave us an
NPS score of 64
(that’s higher than Apple) and a satisfaction rating of
4.6 out of 6 stars
.
They left us reviews like the below:
"This is truly
like no other cohort out there
! The intimate community setting and amazing, intelligent speakers are unmatched. And
I’ve tried several other programs before
."
"I've gotten
tremendous value
out of the course; specifically the
action-oriented nature
of the course (
learning + doing, not just learning
) and the orientation towards landing a career in climate and HOW to do it"
"I learned SO MUCH and
feel 10x more equipped for my climate career goals than before
."
If you are a mid-career professional thinking about moving into climate and working on the most pressing issue of our generation.
Then apply for the Climate Drift Career Accelerator.
We built it precisely for people like you.
See you in one of our Climate Drift interviews 🙌
Apply Now