Title: Introducing: The Climate Drift Community
Author: Unknown Author
URL: https://www.climatedrift.com/p/introducing-the-climate-drift-community
==============================

Welcome to
Climate Drift
- the place where we dive into climate solutions and help you find your role in the race to net zero.
If you haven’t subscribed, join here:
Subscribe
Hi there!
Skander & Marco here.
Two weeks ago we shared our learnings + improvements from the first Climate Drift Career Accelerator for mid-career professionals.
Climate Drift 2.0: How to land a job in climate
Skander Garroum
and
Marco Morawec
·
May 15, 2024
Read full story
Today we shine a light on our newest project:
The Climate Drift Community
Your go-to membership for learning, collaboration, and career growth in climate.
We invite you to join us and help shape the future.
🌊 Let’s dive in
🚀 If you want to make a difference and bring your talent into climate:
Apply to our next cohort and join the Climate Drift Accelerator.
Interviews and admissions are happening right now.
Apply Now
Why are we doing it?
With Climate Drift, we share our insights and deep dives into climate solutions both here via posts (like this one) and across the various channels in our network.
With the
Climate Drift Career Accelerator
we’ve built an intensive course that is designed for professionals with 5+ years of work experience.
But what about those who want to transition into the climate sector but don't have time for an intensive program? And what about those already in the climate sector who want to keep learning and exploring new solutions?
So, we’ve created something new: a membership site for everyone who wants to make a greater impact, transition into climate, and continue learning.
What should be in it?
Although there isn't a climate career playbook yet -- spoiler alert: we're working on it -- our initial components provide a great base to start from:
📚 Curated Resources
Discover recommendations for essential reading, listening, and watching across all of the climate sectors we are tracking, from Energy to Carbon Removal.
🌟
Sub-sector-specific learning groups
Discuss and share your learnings. Gain new perspectives from fellow members. Get unstuck and help others.
🚀 Career Transition Strategies That Work
We continually seek the best strategies for shifting into the climate sector and document them for our members. Plus, we share the effective strategies from our accelerator program, ready to help you make a successful transition.
🤝 Community Access
Our discussion forum allows you to get feedback on your perspectives, pratice your pitch and your experiences, find job opportunities, share ideas, and connect with peers shifting into the climate sector - including those who've already successfully done so. Members-only and private.
🔍 Ask and you shall be answered
Ask the questions you can't ask anywhere else, and get insights you won't find with a Google search or on LinkedIn.
🔥 Exclusive insights
We receive a lot of interesting content, research and announcements, often before they reach the public. We want to share this wealth of climate information with you.
💡 Affordable
Think of it like a gym membership or a running club for your career in climate. For $10 per month, you can continuously build your knowledge and skills. Learn from anywhere, on your own schedule.
Join the Climate Drift Community
How It Will Work
This won't be another Slack channel.
Instead, it will be an online membership site, designed to leverage the collective wisdom of its members and provide access to our ever-growing library of resources.
It's a place for people to connect, find like-minded individuals, learn together, and hold each other accountable.
Is It Free?
No, free education gets little respect and commitment.
Many places charge $10/month for a self-organized Slack channel.
We’ll charge the same to start.
For founding members, the cost is $10/month or $100 annually. (Prices will increase later to approximately $30/month or $360/year.)
What's Next?
We're hosting a virtual kick-off event to dive into proven climate career transition lessons, share success stories and strategies, and ensure that everyone meets at least a handful of other people.
Networking matters, and we'll facilitate these connections in a small group setting.
Sign Up for the Kick off Event here (first month included):
Join the Climate Drift Community
Four reasons to join the Climate Drift community right now
#1
You want to invest in your career in climate.
#2
You seek a peer group of professionals to share ideas, get feedback, and connect with others facing similar challenges.
#3
You want to cut through the noise and have one reliable source for climate career knowledge and resources.
#4
You need recommendations on career transition strategies, networking opportunities, and feedback on job applications and interviews.
And here a bonus reason:
Getting the best talent into climate is our North Star.
And this mission is more urgent than ever before.
Join us and create the most important impact of your career.
Not ready to join?
No worries.
We are going to continue sharing climate sector deep-dives and trying to help as many people as we can.