Title: Introducing: The Climate Drift Career Accelerator
Author: Unknown Author
URL: https://www.climatedrift.com/p/introducing-the-climate-drift-career
==============================

Hey everyone!
We have been working hard behind the scenes.
Next to working together with top climate funds and research institutions (more on that soon), we also spent 80+ hours giving free 1on1 climate career mentor sessions to some 300+ people on our waiting list while having 100+ people sign up for our first climate career transition workshop.
We realized two things: calls are hard to scale and a 1-day workshop is not nearly enough to create the tsunami-type talent wave we need to break into the climate economy.
While many people are already self-educating, taking courses, and earning advanced degrees, they still find it incredibly challenging to transition in climate.
It is time for something new:
Introducing: The Climate Drift Career Accelerator
🚀 What to expect
The purpose of our Climate Drift Career Accelerator is straightforward:
👉 to help you land a job fighting climate change.
We will cover:
- Finding and diving deep into your climate niche
- Targeting the right companies
- Perfecting your pitch
- Building a peer network
- Hearing from Successful Career Switchers
- Having hiring companies pitch you
- Hands-on team projects
- Demonstrating your skills + experience to climate companies
- Maximizing your job offer
Apply here
🌊 Why we do it
The motivation behind this is clear:
Talented professionals often struggle to enter the climate industry, while climate companies find it challenging to recruit top talent.
Our accelerator is designed to bridge this gap, creating a pathway for exceptional candidates to launch and accelerate their climate careers.
🤝 Building with you
This is our first cohort. We believe we've pinpointed the challenges in bringing people into the climate sector and are currently introducing the first 100 individuals.
This builds on Marco's previous success in guiding thousands into the tech industry.
But the climate challenge is new, and we will need to find more and better ways to help people shift into climate.
❓ What else do I need to know ❓
Who is the ideal candidate for the Climate Drift Career Accelerator?
The program is suited for those who are:
Passionate about starting or accelerating a career in the climate sector.
Proactive and eager to apply their skills to climate challenges.
Open to learning, collaborating, and networking with peers and experts.
Ready to commit time and energy to an 8-week program.
What is the application process for the Climate Drift Career Accelerator?
The process involves:
Completing the Climate Drift Career Accelerator application form.
Undergoing an enrollment call to ensure suitability for the program.
What is the cost of the program, and are there any discounts?
We are still determining the full tuition cost (probably in the
$10,000
range).
Our first 50 successful applicants will receive an 80% founding member advantage, reducing the tuition to $2,000.
Additional scholarships are also available.
Are there scholarships available for the program?
Yes!
We received $250k+ in scholarship money from people who believe in what we’re doing.
Scholarships are provided based on background, gender, diversity, location, and personal circumstances.
These are awarded during and after the enrollment calls.
Is the program remote or in-person?
The Climate Drift Career Accelerator is a fully remote program, allowing participation from various locations.
We will target time zones that are convenient for most people across the globe.
All sessions will also be recorded and shared with everyone.
Are you interested? Apply to be a founding member. We have started enrolling people now.
Apply here
Last but not least: For Investors and Climate Companies
We constantly collaborate with leading climate companies and venture capital firms, connecting our community members to exceptional job opportunities.
We've already secured commitments from several notable VCs and climate companies to inject top talent into their hiring pipelines (more on this soon).
Through our process, we directly match your roles with suitable community members, and then present their profiles to you for double-opt-in.
Additionally, we're inviting companies to offer real-world challenges for our members to tackle and demonstrate their transferable skills to your teams in the most direct way possible, thus de-risking your hiring decision significantly.
Companies and investors can apply here:
Apply here
Small waves today. Big waves tomorrow. 🌊
That’s how things always start.
We hope to see your application come through. 🙌
Aloha,
Skander & Marco